





Network Working Group                                          C. Newman
Internet Draft: Anonymous SASL Mechanism                        Innosoft
Document: draft-newman-sasl-anon-00.txt                        June 1997
                                                   Expires in six months


                        Anonymous SASL Mechanism


Status of this memo

     This document is an Internet-Draft.  Internet-Drafts are working
     documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas,
     and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
     working documents as Internet-Drafts.

     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."

     To view the entire list of current Internet-Drafts, please check
     the "1id-abstracts.txt" listing contained in the Internet-Drafts
     Shadow Directories on ftp.is.co.za (Africa), ftp.nordu.net
     (Europe), munnari.oz.au (Pacific Rim), ds.internic.net (US East
     Coast), or ftp.isi.edu (US West Coast).


Abstract

     It is common practice on the Internet to permit anonymous access to
     various services.  Traditionally, this has been done within the
     context of a plain text password mechanism using "anonymous" as the
     user name and trace information, such as an email address, as the
     password.  As SASL [SASL] provides a framework for authentication
     mechanisms, a formalized anonymous mechanism is simple to add.


1. Conventions Used in this Document

     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY"
     in this document are to be interpreted as defined in "Key words for
     use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS].







Newman                                                          [Page 1]

Internet Draft          Anonymous SASL Mechanism               June 1997


2. Anonymous SASL mechanism

     The mechanism name associated with anonymous access is "ANONYMOUS".

     The mechanism consists of a single message from the client to the
     server.  The client sends optional trace information in the form of
     a human readable string.  The trace information should take one of
     three forms: an Internet email address, an opaque string which does
     not contain the '@' character and can be interpreted by the system
     administrator of the client's domain, or nothing.  For privacy
     reasons, an Internet email address should only be used with
     permission from the user.

     A server which permits anonymous access will announce support for
     the ANONYMOUS mechanism, and allow anyone to log in using that
     mechanism, usually with restricted access.

     The formal grammar for the client message using Augmented BNF
     [ABNF] follows.

     message         = [email / token]

     TCHAR           = %x20..3F / %x41..7E
                       ;; any printable US-ASCII character except '@'

     email           = addr-spec
                       ;; as defined in RFC 822, except with no free
                       ;; insertion of linear-white-space, and the
                       ;; local-part MUST either be entirely enclosed in
                       ;; quotes or entirely unquoted

     token           = 1*255TCHAR

3. Example

     Here is a sample anonymous login between an IMAP client and server.
     In this example, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client
     and server respectively.  If such lines are wrapped without a new
     "C:" or "S:" label, then the wrapping is for editorial clarity and
     is not part of the command.

     Note that this example uses the IMAP profile [IMAP4] of SASL.  The
     base64 encoding of challenges and responses, as well as the "+ "
     preceding the responses are part of the IMAP4 profile, not part of
     SASL itself.  Newer profiles of SASL will include the client
     message with the AUTHENTICATE command itself so the extra round
     trip below (the server response with an empty "+ ") can be
     eliminated.



Newman                                                          [Page 2]

Internet Draft          Anonymous SASL Mechanism               June 1997


     In this example, the user's opaque identification token is "sirhc".

        S: * OK IMAP4 server ready
        C: A001 CAPABILITY
        S: * CAPABILITY IMAP4 IMAP4rev1 AUTH=CRAM-MD5 AUTH=ANONYMOUS
        S: A001 OK done
        C: A002 AUTHENTICATE ANONYMOUS
        S: +
        C: c2lyaGM=
        S: A003 OK Welcome, trace information "sirhc" has been logged.

4. Security Considerations

     If the anonymous user has any write privileges, a denial of service
     attack is possible by filling up all available space.  This can be
     prevented by disabling all write access by anonymous users.

     If anonymous users have read and write access to the same area, the
     server can be used as a communication mechanism to anonymously
     exchange illegal information.  Servers which accept anonymous
     submissions should implement the common "drop box" model which
     forbids anonymous read access to the area where anonymous
     submissions are accepted.

     If the anonymous user can run many expensive operations (e.g. an
     IMAP SEARCH BODY command), this could enable a denial of service
     attack.  Servers are encouraged to limit the number of anonymous
     users and reduce their priority or limit their resource usage.

     If there is no idle timeout for the anonymous user and there is a
     limit on the number of anonymous users, a denial of service attack
     is enabled.  Servers should implement an idle timeout for anonymous
     users.

     The trace information is not authenticated so it can be falsified.
     This can be used as an attempt to get someone else in trouble for
     access to questionable information.  Administrators trying to trace
     abuse need to realize this information may be falsified.  Servers
     which need reliable trace information should not offer the
     ANONYMOUS mechanism.

     A client which uses the user's correct email address as trace
     information without explicit permission may violate that user's
     privacy.  Information about who accesses an anonymous archive on a
     sensitive subject (e.g. sexual abuse) has strong privacy needs.
     Clients should not send the email address without explicit





Newman                                                          [Page 3]

Internet Draft          Anonymous SASL Mechanism               June 1997


     permission of the user and should offer the option of supplying no
     trace token -- thus only exposing the source IP address and time.
     Anonymous proxy servers could enhance this privacy, but would have
     to consider the resulting potential denial of service attacks.

     Anonymous connections are susceptible to man in the middle attacks
     which alter the data transferred.  Clients and servers are
     encouraged to support external integrity and encryption mechanisms.

     Protocols which fail to require an explicit anonymous login are
     more susceptible to break-ins given certain common implementation
     techniques.  Specifically, Unix servers which offer user login may
     initially start up as root and switch to the appropriate user id
     after an explicit login command.  Normally such servers refuse all
     data access commands prior to explicit login and may enter a
     restricted security environment (e.g. the Unix chroot function) for
     anonymous users.  If anonymous access is not explicitly requested,
     the entire data access machinery is exposed to external security
     attacks without the chance for explicit protective measures.
     Protocols which offer restricted data access should not allow
     anonymous data access without an explicit login step.

5. References

     [ABNF] Crocker, D., "Augmented BNF for Syntax Specifications:
     ABNF", Work in progress: draft-ietf-drums-abnf-xx.txt

     [IMAP4] Crispin, M., "Internet Message Access Protocol - Version
     4rev1", RFC 2060, University of Washington, December 1996.

         <ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2060.txt>

     [KEYWORDS] Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
     Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, Harvard University, March 1997.

         <ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2119.txt>

     [SASL] Myers, "Simple Authentication and Security Layer (SASL)",
     work in progress.

6. Author's Address

     Chris Newman
     Innosoft International, Inc.
     1050 Lakes Drive
     West Covina, CA 91790 USA

     Email: chris.newman@innosoft.com



Newman                                                          [Page 4]

Internet Draft          Anonymous SASL Mechanism               June 1997





















































Newman                                                          [Page 5]


